# A Tornado of Freedom



What can we expect from our meetings?





To learn not to expect. Not expecting is a great art. When you no longer live in expectation, you live in a new 	dimension. You are free. Your mind is free. Your body is free. To understand intellectually that we are not a 	psycho-physical entity in the process of becoming is a necessary first step, but this understanding is not 	sufficient. The fact that we are not the body must become an actual experience that penetrates and liberates 	our muscles, our internal organs and even our cells. An intellectual understanding that corresponds to a sudden, 	fleeting recognition of our true nature brings us a flash of pure joy, but when we have full knowledge that we 	are not the body, we are that joy.





How can I perceive in a sensorial fashion that I am not the body?





&nbsp;





 





We all experience moments of happiness which are accompanied by a perception of expansion and relaxation. 	Before this body perception, we were in a state of timelessness, an unadulterated, causeless joy of which the 	physical sensation is simply the ultimate consequence. This joy perceives itself. At that moment, we were not a 	limited body in space, not a person. We knew ourselves in the immediacy of the moment. We all know this felicity 	without cause. When we explore deeply what we call our body, we discover that its very substance is this joy. So 	we no longer have the need or the taste or even the possibility of finding happiness in external objects.





&nbsp;





 





How is this deep exploration accomplished?





&nbsp;





 





Do not reject the body sensations and emotions that present themselves to you. Let them blossom fully in your 	awareness without any goal or any interference from the will. Progressively, the potential energy imprisoned in 	muscular tensions liberates itself, the dynamism of the psychosomatic structure exhausts itself, and the return 	toward fundamental stability takes place. This purification of body sensation is a great art. It requires patience, 	determination and courage. It finds its expression at the level of sensation through a gradual expansion of the 	body into the surrounding space and a simultaneous penetration of the somatic structure by that space. That 	space is not experienced as a simple absence of objects. When the attention frees itself from perceptions that 	hold it in thrall, it discovers itself as that self-luminous space which is the true substance of the body. At this 	moment, the duality between body and space is abolished. The body is expanded to the size of the universe 	and contains all things tangible and intangible in its heart. Nothing is external to it. We all have this body of joy, 	this awakened body, this body of universal welcoming. We are all complete, with no missing parts. Only explore 	your kingdom and take possession of it knowingly. Do not live any longer in that wretched shack of a limited body.





&nbsp;





 





I have brief glimpses of this realm in moments of stillness, then I go to work and find myself in 	an environment which is neither royal nor peaceful and my serenity immediately disappears. How can I keep my 	equanimity permanently?





&nbsp;





 





Everything that appears in awareness is nothing other than awareness, your co-workers, clients, superiors, 	absolutely everything, including the premises, the furniture and the equipment. First understand this intellectually, 	then verify that this is so. There comes a moment where this feeling of intimacy, this benevolent space around you 	no longer goes away; you find yourself at home everywhere, even in the packed waiting room of a train station. You 	only go out of it when you go into the past or the future. Do not stay in that hovel. This immensity awaits you right 	here, at this very moment. Already being acquainted with its presence and once having tasted the harmony underlying 	appearances, let the perceptions of the external world and your body sensations unfold freely in your welcoming 	awareness until the moment that the background of plenitude reveals itself spontaneously.





&nbsp;





 





This reversal of perspective is analogous to that which allows the sudden recognition of an angelic face in a tree in 	one of those early twentieth century prints that so delight children. At first we only see the tree, then informed by 	a caption under the picture that an angel is hiding there, we begin a meticulous examination of the foliage until we 	finally see the angel which had always been right there before our eyes. What is important is to know that there is an 	angel, where it is hiding and to have once experienced the process by which the tree progressively loses its form to 	the point where the lines of which appearance is composed begin to appear as such and then recompose to confide 	the secret of the image to us. Once the way is paved, subsequent reversals of perspective are easier and easier until 	we see the angel and the tree simultaneously, so to speak. In the same way, once our true nature has been 	recognized, the remaining distinctions between ignorance and awakening become progressively blurred and yield 	to the fundamental suchness of being.





&nbsp;





 





I am beginning to realize that I am all gummed up in my body, my sensations and my impression 	of being a separate individual.





&nbsp;





 





How does this gummed up feeling manifest?





&nbsp;





 





I feel as if I were hypnotized, both by my pride, my emotions, especially my anger, and by the agitation in my body.





&nbsp;





 





Right. As soon as you become aware that you are hypnotized, the hypnosis ceases.





&nbsp;





 





How is that? This point is unclear to me.





&nbsp;





 





Ask yourself who is hypnotized. Inquire deeply. Who is it? Where is it? You will find that it is not possible to find 	such an entity. If you explore your mind and your body, you will find a few concepts that you identify with like 	&quot;I am a woman&quot;, &quot;I am a human being&quot;, &quot;I am a lawyer&quot;, etc.. You can also find certain sensations in your body, 	certain areas that are more opaque, more solid, that you identify with as well. But when you look more closely, 	it becomes obvious that you are not this sensation in your chest, nor this thought of being a woman, since 	feelings and thoughts come and go and what you really are is permanent. At this very moment, the hypnosis 	ends. The occurrence of these thoughts and feelings is less of a problem than your identification with them. As 	soon as you become aware of them, you distance yourself. You are free. In this freedom, you do not locate 	yourself anywhere. It is important to stay in this non-localization, as we have the tendency to hasten to take 	hold of a new identification as soon as we have let go of the previous one, like a monkey who doesn't let go of a 	branch before latching onto another.





&nbsp;





 





You will see how wonderful it is to live in the air in this way, without hanging on, unattached. In the beginning, 	it seems a bit strange, although your new attitude doesn't constitute an obstacle to anything. You can always 	fulfill your functions as a mother or as a lawyer, feel your body and so forth. In fact, to be nothing, in the air, no 	where, is very practical. It simplifies life a great deal. Do not be content merely to understand. Put your 	understanding into practice. Try being nobody. Let go of the branches.





&nbsp;





 





Isn't it hard after that to come back into your body and live daily life?





&nbsp;





 





You were never in your body, so the question of coming back into it doesn't come up. Your body is in you. You 	are not in it. Your body appears to you as a series of sensory perceptions and concepts. It is in this way that you 	know you have a body, when you feel it or when you think of it. These perceptions and these thoughts appear 	in you, pure conscious attention. You do not appear in them, contrary to what your parents, your teachers and 	nearly the whole of the society you live in has taught you. In flagrant contradiction to your actual experience, 	they have taught you that you are in your body as consciousness, that consciousness is a function emerging 	from the brain, an organ of your body. I suggest that you do not give undue credence to this second-hand 	knowledge and that you inquire into the raw data of your own experience. Remember the recipes for happiness 	that were given to you by these same people when you were a child, study hard, get a good job, marry the right 	man, etc.? These recipes don't work, otherwise you wouldn't be here asking these questions. They don't work 	because they are based on a false perspective of reality, a perspective that I am suggesting that you put into 	question.





&nbsp;





 





See for yourself, then, whether you appear in your body or your mind, or whether, on the contrary, they appear 	in you. It's a reversal of perspective analogous to the discovery of the angel in the tree. Even though this change 	seems minimal at first, it is a revolution with unimaginable and infinite consequences. If you honestly accept the 	possibility that the tree might in fact be an angel, the angel will reveal itself to you and your life will become magic.





&nbsp;





 





Can you speak to us about the practice of living intuitively from the heart?





&nbsp;





 





Do not be a person, do not be anything. Having understood that you are no one, you live the truth according to 	this knowledge. When the idea or sensation of being a person no longer bothers you, whether you are thinking or 	not, whether you are acting or not, you live the truth from the fullness of the heart.





&nbsp;





 





At this point, am I in right relationship with myself and with the world?





&nbsp;





 





Oh, yes. You are in right relationship which is that of inclusion. The world as well as your body and you mind are 	included in your true self. Love is inclusion. Understanding is an intermediate step, but the final destination, the 	true center, is the heart.





&nbsp;





 





Is the heart the place between this branch and the next, to use the analogy of the monkey?





&nbsp;





 





If you agree to let go of the branch you are clinging to without catching hold of another, you fall into the heart. You  	have to accept dying, letting everything you know slip away, everything you have been taught, everything you 	possess, including your life or at least everything that you think at this stage is your life. This requires daring. It's a 	kind of suicide.





&nbsp;





 





Is it really like that? For example, do you remember the moments that preceded your recognition?





&nbsp;





 





Yes.





&nbsp;





 





Was it like that?





&nbsp;





 





Yes.





&nbsp;





 





Thank you. Before that did you have any idea what was going to happen?





&nbsp;





 





Yes and no. Yes, because I felt the invitation. No, because up until that point, I had only known relative happiness, 	relative truth, relative knowledge, and I could not have imagined the absolute, the ineffable. The self is beyond all 	concept, all projection. It is why we cannot steer ourselves to it under our own steam and must wait for it to solicit 	us. But when it invites us, we must say yes joyfully, without hesitation. The decision belongs to us, the only decision 	in which we truly have a free choice.





&nbsp;





 





One of the reasons I postpone and do not make myself available to the invitation is my fear that 	my life will be radically changed.





&nbsp;





 





Oh, yes. It will be.





&nbsp;





 





My family, as well?





&nbsp;





 





Your family, too. Everything will be changed.





&nbsp;





 





I am afraid that some people will leave me and be replaced by others.





&nbsp;





 





I can assure you that you will regret nothing.





&nbsp;





 





Is it possible to have received the invitation and to have refused it?





&nbsp;





 





Yes, you are free.





&nbsp;





 





Will I be invited again?





Yes. Be ready. Be available. You are available when you understand that there is nothing that you can do on your 	own to get to the King. When you acknowledge your total powerlessness, you become an empty room. As soon as 	you become an empty room, you are a sanctuary. So the King can enter, take the throne and grace you with 	immortal presence.






