# Summer Retreat in Temecula, California

    

        

            

            

                

                    

                        

Due to the size of the facility, the number of participants to the Summer retreat with Francis Lucille in Temecula, California will be strictly limited to 60. Reservations will be taken on a first come, first serve basis. We recommend that you notify us as soon as possible if you plan to attend.  

                        

                        

                            

                                

                                    

                                    

                                    

                                        

                                            

                                                

                                                

                                                    

                                                        

                                                            

                                                            

                                                            

                                                            

**Details:** 

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
**Week #1&nbsp;**- Saturday,&nbsp;**August 29**th to Saturday,&nbsp;**September, 5th**
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;**Week #2**&nbsp;- Saturday,&nbsp;**September 5th**&nbsp;to Saturday,&nbsp;**September 12th**

Location: the home of Francis &amp; Laura Lucille on a serene hilltop in Temecula, California.&nbsp;  

                                                            Tuition: $420 per week. &nbsp; You may join us for either or both weeks.&nbsp;

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Week #1 begins with dinner at 6:00pm on Saturday, August 29th

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Week #2 begins with dinner at 6:00pm on Saturday, September 5th

For those interested, vegetarian lunch and dinner arrangements have been organized separately from the retreat at a cost of $150 per week. (This includes the cost of retreat food supplies, paper and cleaning supplies, catering, a cleaning service used during and at the end of the retreat, and partially covers scholarships for those performing karma yoga tasks.) A credit of $75 against the food coop fee will be provided for those who wish to cook a dinner meal. The kitchen facilities are available only to those participating in the food coop. There is a $40 per week fee for those not participating in the food coop to help cover the cleaning and maintenance costs of the retreat facility.&nbsp;

Scholarships are welcome for those with financial hardships only. A scholarship application must be completed and approved prior to August 16th to participate. &nbsp;Please request a scholarship application form from:

[

bellarotondella@cox.net

](http://web.archive.org/web/20100620050557/mailto:bellarotondella@cox.net)

Registration: Please send your deposit of $100 payable to Francis Lucille to the address below. Deposits are non-refundable. The balance is due upon arrival either in cash or by check. Early reservations are recommended as space is limited.&nbsp;

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Francesca Rotondella&nbsp;

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 4901 Marlborough Drive&nbsp;

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; San Diego, CA 92116&nbsp;

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 619.282.4313&nbsp;

TRANSPORTATION:&nbsp; Temecula is accessible from several airports in the area including San Diego Airport (1 hour), Ontario Airport (1 hour) and Los Angeles Airport (2 hours). Names of friends interested in forming car rental groups to share the cost and facilitate transportation to and from the airport and lodging facilities to Francis' home can be coordinated. Driving instructions to Francis' home are provided below.&nbsp;

DRIVING INSTRUCTIONS:&nbsp;

Take Highway 15 to the Rancho California exit, go west on Rancho California (coming from San Diego turn left, coming from LA turn right). Go 2 miles.&nbsp;

Turn left on Via Santa Rosa (first left after long incline). Go 1 mile.&nbsp;

Turn right on Via Vaquero. Go one half mile.&nbsp;

Turn right at driveway marked 49555 (at the bottom of a short hill, directly across from Calle Pinturesca). Francis and Laura's home is the one on the right at the top of the hill, about one half mile.&nbsp;

CHECK THE INTERNET FOR A COMPLETE LIST OF LOCAL HOTELS &amp; MOTELS,&nbsp;

A FEW LOCAL ACCOMMODATIONS ARE LISTED BELOW:&nbsp;

HOTELS &nbsp;(Located approximately 7 minutes from Laura and Francis' home):&nbsp;

**MOTEL 6**
**:**&nbsp;
(951) 676-7199&nbsp;

&nbsp;41900 Moreno Dr., near corner of Rancho California and Jefferson&nbsp;

**HOLIDAY INN EXPRESS**
:&nbsp; (extended stay rate 7 days for $84.99 per night, friends of Francis rate
&nbsp;Jefferson Avenue, Temecula&nbsp;

&nbsp;951-699-2444&nbsp;

**COMFORT INN**
:&nbsp;
&nbsp;(951) 296-3788&nbsp;

&nbsp;27338 Jefferson Ave, near corner of Winchester and Jefferson&nbsp;

ALSO: Private rooms available&nbsp;

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; in a peaceful home in Fallbrook De Luz &nbsp;&nbsp;(Located approximately 35 minutes from Laura and Francis' home).&nbsp;

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp; area for $30 per night.&nbsp;

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Annie and Zia Yazdani&nbsp;

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 41850 Via del Gavilan&nbsp;

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Fallbrook, CA 92028&nbsp;

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; annie's cell 760 468 4515&nbsp;

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; home 760 723 7196 ( but answering machine not&nbsp;

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; reliable)

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Private room available in lovely, peaceful Temecula home for $35 per night,&nbsp; contact Tom at&nbsp;**&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;**

[

**quantum99@verizon.net**

](http://web.archive.org/web/20100620050557/mailto:quantum99@verizon.net)

                                                            

                                                            

                                                            

                                                        

                                                    

                                                

                                                

                                            

                                        

                                    

                                    

                                    

                                

                            

                        

                        

                    

                

            

            

        

    

    

        

        

    

