# There is nothing you can do to awaken so just go to the movies or something - Francis Answers - 43

Question: Hello and thank you for your time. Which of the following statements reflect the truth and would you please explain why or why not? Statement 1. No person gets enlightened or there is no one to become enlightened. Statement 2. Enlightenment is an event that occurs in the human mind when the belief that they are a separate individual with choice and control is questioned and drops away. Statement 3: There is nothing you can do to awaken so just go to the movies or something. This last statement seems to imply that there is no correlation between seeking enlightenment via teachers, teachings, self-inquiry,etc and waking up. Your reflections on these topics would be appreciated. Thanks again.

  

Dear Regina,

  

Statement 1. is true,&nbsp;

Statement 2. has to be amended as follows: Enlightenment is a non objective experience that occurs in consciousness as a result of which the belief that we are a separate individual with choice and control is questioned and drops away.

Statement 3. is misleading and lacks clarity. It is true if the &quot;you&quot; in it is the false &quot;you&quot;, it is false if the &quot;you&quot; in it is the true &quot;you&quot;. How could the false &quot;you&quot; seek its ending? How could it really do anything, since it is not the real doer? That which seeks the Truth is therefore the real &quot;you&quot; and every step it takes to seek enlightenment is efficient. Teachers upholding statement 3. are really telling you &quot;my teachings are useless&quot; and they are right on that point. Follow their advice: stay away from them.

  

Love,

  

Francis

  

