# Do you address this issue of working "on" the gross body in parallel with the understanding in the intellect? - Francis Answers - 44

Question: Dear Francis, We know that the intellectual realization or understanding of the knowledge of our essential nature is the first step (a big one indeed) towards Full Understanding (usually called Self-Realization or Liberation), that will necessarily include the "assimilation" of the mentioned knowledge, totally and fully. In my understanding (please correct me if wrong), some of the habits or embedded tendencies created by our conditioning in our life (or past lifetimes if we adhere to the hindu concept) had already passed the status of simple "mental tendencies" and became imprinted in our nervous systems (or cellular memory) and may cloud or slow down the very same process of assimilation (of the knowledge). (I am talking of normal people, not clinic cases of neurosis, schizophrenia, etc..) It may appear that the simple fact that we "know" that "I am not the body" intellectually, doesn't have the necessary strength, in many cases, to dissolve, in itself, those physical" obstacles to the process of assimilation. 

1. Do you address this issue of working "on" the gross body in parallel with the understanding in the intellect? 

2. If yes, how? 

Thanks in advance, Peace, Mouna

Dear Mouna,

The answer to 1. is yes.

The answer to 2. as been outlined in "Francis Answers - 2":

Here is what I suggest to you: Be acutely aware of the actual experience of your body. It is made of body sensations floating in the space of your awareness. Surrender,  offer these sensations to the presence, to that space in which they appear. Don't interfere with them by trying to suppress them, keep them, or change them. Do that first during moments of availability in your life, for instance during these periods set apart for meditation or yoga. Start sitting as comfortably as possible, then add yoga postures and other exercises from the hatha yoga paraphernalia, always being gentle with your body, without inflicting pain or discomfort. Then gradually incorporate this awareness and surrender of your body to other situations in your life, sitting at your desk or in the dentist's chair, etc..

Also, when thoughts about the Truth, the path, your true nature appear to you, don't avoid them. Welcome them. Let them guide you to the conscious presence to which they refer, to that in you which perceives and understands, in sharp contrast with the thoughts of ignorance, the thoughts of fear and desire, which always refer to a separate "Me". If such thoughts appear,  investigate the nature of this "Me", and whether it is separate or not.

Finally, there are external sense perceptions through which the so-called physical world appears to you. They too point to the presence in which they appear. Proceed with these in the same manner as with your body sensations, offering them to that presence, to your pure consciousness.

There are limitations however to that which can be transmitted over the internet. There is something special about being in the physical presence of your guru that cannot be experienced without a direct contact.

Love,

Francis

