# We are that which is its own cause - Francis Answers - 49

  

Question: Francis, Based on your answer to question 12, I am right to say that we can not prove that consciousness is not the product of the brain? All we can prove is that the brain is subject to the laws of physical reality which are universal and non local. Therefore, I am still left with the possibility that consciousness is the product of the brain. Thank you

Dear Aziz,

The answer you are referring to must lack clarity. First I define consciousness as that, whatever that is, which is aware of my words in this very moment. The correct and full statement would be: based on phenomenal (scientific) evidence, we cannot prove or disprove that consciousness is brain dependent. We cannot even design any thought experiment that would prove or disprove this. If you think you can, I am very interested to hear about it.

You are attached to the theory of consciousness being the product of the brain, of something non physical being caused by a physical object.

How could something which is real (consciousness) be the product of something which is not real (a limited object)? I obviously failed to convince you of two facts:

Fact 1. Consciousness is absolutely real, beyond any doubts, and is in fact the only reality we could be absolutely certain of.

Fact 2. The reality of any seemingly limited physical object (such as a brain) is non local. It follows that even if we make the far fetched assumption that the brain "creates" consciousness - whatever that means-, the brain is not the ultimate reality of consciousness, which must be non-local. The reality of consciousness, the real "I" can therefore only be universal. 

Let's consider it again from a slightly different angle: let's assume again that consciousness is the product of the brain. What then?  The brain obviously is not the product of itself, therefore consciousness is the product of whatever it is that produces the brain. We are led to the conclusion that in reality consciousness can only be the product of something which is the product of itself. I am comfortable with this, because on the one hand I am comfortable with consciousness being its own cause, and because on the other hand it is obvious to me as it is to you, and you agree with me on this, that there is exactly zero evidence, scientific, phenomenal, or otherwise, proving that consciousness is the product of the brain. And if we assume that consciousness is not its own cause, it follows that the reality of consciousness, the real I, can only be that which is its own cause, and I am absolutely comfortable with that: we are really that which is its own cause.

Thank you for your interest in this question.

Sincerely,

Francis

