# How do I get through the times in my day when I have to deal with insensitive & completely ignorant people? - Francis Answers - 69

Question:

>Namaste Francis, I am very happy to find that you will answer questions of the truthseekers. Thank you! My question is this: How do I get through the times in my day when I have to deal with insensitive & completely ignorant people? So critical and hard-hearted most of the time. I am one of the few young people there, but even the other young people can be hard to get through to. Sometimes, I get very frustrated with my co-workers and I don't want to be around them. Then I start to think, there is no other place I am supposed to be except where I am. But, I still have feelings of frustration quite often. What am I to do? Thank you for your time and help with my question. Tiffany

Dear Tiffany,

Well, you have to take into consideration the totality of the situation. If I was in this situation, I would ask myself the question: Do I truly have to put up with that? and the answer would depend on many factors. How easy is it to find a job with a more dignified atmosphere, how difficult is it to have to tolerate this insensitivity and this stupidity, etc...? It may well be that, investigating the job offers in other areas, you find a more interesting opportunity. Finally, if I would reach the conclusion that I have to stay, as a last option, I would take these frustrating episodes as yoga exercises in equanimity. Why should the stupid behavior of your coworkers deprive you of your peace? Do what feels right without caring about their judging you. Why should their behavior, their problem, become your problem? Only because you want them to love you? Find your love within, and without in the company of truly loving people. Here is a saying from Arabic wisdom: the dogs bark, the caravan keeps passing by. Let the dogs bark, be that caravan.

Love,

Francis

