# Awareness is temporary - Francis Answers - 108

  

Location: Barcelona, Spain&nbsp;

Questions: 

_Dear Francis, all these questions about awakening and enlightenment, being present... all refer to people living with a body. You can stand as awareness more or less frequently, but you still eat, feel the temperature of the air, sleep... All this is temporary and lasts as the brain lasts. What happens when the body dies? Do you know it for sure?_

Dear Xavier,

There is a misunderstanding about what &quot;standing as awareness&quot; means. You see it as a temporary state, or condition of the body-mind. I see the body-mind as a temporary state, or condition of the awareness I am.

You say &quot;All this (awareness) is temporary and lasts as the brain lasts.&quot;

Dear Xavier, what happens when the body dies? Do you know it for sure? As long as you know, or believe to know the answer, why ask the question?&nbsp;

_Is it possible to be aware or enlightened as you interact with people and mundane problems during a &quot;normal&quot; daily activity?_

Yes.

_How can you act as a non separated entity when you are negotiating a contract, for instance?_

As a separate entity, you try to maximize your profit and advantage -a very short sighted view of life. As universal consciousness, you do your best to reach a deal that makes both parties happy. A satisfied customer will be a return customer or will prescribe your products or services to other customers, a dissatisfied vendor won't deliver good services.

_Francis, the &quot;Awareness that you are&quot; is attached to Francis' body and brain. You eat and sleep. I guess you sometimes feel tired, and a hot or cold weather may discomfort your body. The eternity, stability, unchangeability... of &quot;the Self that you are&quot; is affected?_

No

_And apart from possible physical disturbances, how do you feel?_

Happy, enjoying life, free from the feeling of impending doom that goes along with the fear of death.

_Is &quot;happiness&quot; your normal state?_

Yes, it is yours too.

_&nbsp;_

_Is there any sensation you could describe so I can understand how you feel?&nbsp;_

Like a fish in the water, and like the water, and the rest.

Love,

Francis

    

        

            

Reply

            

            

Reply to all

            

            

Forward

            

            

            

            

            

            

            

            

  

            

            

        

    

