# What is the difference between a corpse and a living person? - Francis Answers - 165

Location: Japan

Comments:

>I am always confused about the difference between "consciousness" and "awareness." Everything is consciousness. I understand that ...I guess. It is said that consciousness is that which makes the heart pump and allows the eyes to see and sense the world. And when we die, what is left? The corpse has no consciousness. But everything is said to exist in consciousness/awareness. A stone. A plant. So why not a corpse. So what is the difference between a corpse and a living person. Both exist as awareness, no? But there obviously is some fundamental difference. A corpse has no possibility of realizing non dual awareness.... So does this all come down to understanding a distinction between consciousness and awareness? Have I framed the question wrong? Best wishes.

Dear Steven,

I use consciousness and awareness as synonyms.  Consciousness is the reality of our experience, that which truly perceives it. If there is only one reality, consiousness must also be the substance of everything.  I cannot prove to you that there is only one reality anymore than I can prove to you that there is consciousness. All I can say is that I am absolutely certain that there is consciousness perceiving the details of this moment, that this consciousness is the reality of our experience, and that there is only one reality that interconnects this consciousness and everything it perceives. If your experience is different, please let me know how.

You asked what is the difference between a corpse and a living person. If by "living person" you mean a living body, the differences are the well known vital signs: presence of a pulse, breathing, blood pressure, responsiveness to stimuli, etc…If by "living person" you mean consciousness, the difference is even more striking: a body, dead or alive, is perceived and doesn't perceive, consciousness perceives and is not perceived. As a result, neither a corpse nor a living body can realize non dual awareness. Only awareness can know itself in its limitlessness and in its timelessness, in all its glory and love and sweetness.

Warmest regards,

Francis