# What makes one qualified to guide others on the path? - Francis Answers - 171

Beloved Francis,

A short while ago I asked the following question:

When one is established in the impersonal Awareness, having gone beyond the distinction of teacher and student, but at the same time acknowledging the importance of it on the relative plane, what makes such a one qualified/ready to guide others on the Direct Path, as there isn't really a formal transmission involved, as far as I understand it?

Without a shadow of a doubt (as you like to say :-)) this Consciousness is recognized as Truth and Beauty itself, 'my' true nature.

This realization spontaneously stabilizes itself more and more in daily life.

However, when the duality of teacher/student and seeking/realizing (or unfolding) gradually falls away with it, maybe I first have to ask if there exist the possibility of ignorance or delusion in this process?

Then, there is the further curiosity about when, according to your experience, someone can genuinely and without self-delusion guide others on the Direct Path?

You already mentioned speaking from own experience, and to be totally honest and earnest. I think there is a lot to share on this topic, but maybe you can point out some other important aspects? As it is sometimes confusing what teachers say and do concerning this, and it therefore is certainly not without reason why Dennis Waite wrote the book 'Enlightenment, Path through the Jungle'.

I understand you have a lot of questions coming to you and may have limited time and availability, but as I find your clear understanding and explanations highly valuable, it would be most supporting to stay in touch by email or skype to be able to ask you a question.

With patience and gratitude I am looking very much forward if you can clarify some of which I wrote, in order to shed all ignorance away!

Most affectionately,

Jerome

Dear Jeroen,

Don't think you are the only one asking this question. Many ask the same question, and many more don't, because they want to start teaching to satisfy their ego, and they are afraid that my answer would demonstrate their unpreparedness. So they start teaching and join the increasing crowd of half-baked teachers teaching half baked truths.

You can guide others no farther than to where you are. If you are not established in peace and happiness, guiding others will be a distraction preventing further progress, unless you do so under the umbrella and the guidance of a karana guru. I did this for fifteen years in France and in California, conducting meditation sessions, answering questions, but my friends were always send to my teacher to become his disciples. That's how I learned how to teach.

Many sages are not teachers, and many more teachers are not sages. What do you want to be? a teacher or a sage?

How would you prefer to be: happy, fulfilled, without teaching, or unhappy and teaching? Think about this: because a sage has mastered the fulfillment of his desires, there is no need for him to teach to make a living. Therefore teaching is not a profession in the usual sense, although it may appear to be the case.

Don't count on teaching to make you happy. Get happy first, no matter whether you teach or not. Then teach, if you want to, out of this happiness.

You could ask: how do I know that I am unshakably established in peace and happiness?. Well, in case the meaning of these words is not clear enough to you, here are a few hints:

You should at least have mastered the following issues:

1. relationships with friends, supervisors, employees, clients, parents, children and spouses should be harmonious.

2. there should be financial abundance due to the discovery of the universal law of infinite supply. Any professional activity should be performed not out of the necessity to make money, but out of the joy it brings about.

3. more generally speaking, all desires should spontaneously materialize due to the absence of attachment.

4. fear of death should be absent.

In addition to these absolute prerequisites, teaching requires the following;

1. A vocation: the love, the enthusiasm, the passion for teaching (also an absolute prerequisite)

2. Highly developed communication skills, both at the intellectual and at the feeling levels. (Intellectual skills are required only for the path of knowledge).

3. Pedagogical skills acquired (among other things) through many years of steady attendance of the teaching sessions of a karana guru. 

Skills 2 and 3 are not absolutely mandatory, since they can be developed "on the job". The efficiency of the teaching will improve as these skills improve.

And, yes, last but not least, since you can only teach what you are, you can only teach from your own experience, not from hearsay, not from memory, and, of course, always with absolute honesty

Love,

Francis

In your response you outline some 'prerequisites' to teaching. Although I agree that, rather than be concerned about teaching others, it makes better sense to look deeply and wake up to the many illusions that plague us. 

Teaching happens if/when it happens in ways that we might not understand. 

We might have some ideas about what teaching is, but teaching happens in mysterious ways. 

If one is looking deeply, being sincere in his/her enquiry, that is sufficient in itself.

But I am writing you because it seems to me that when you outline some 'prerequisites' to teaching, you might be inviting the mind to compare, to measure and to get involved in thinking : 'Where am I at as a teacher?'. 'Am I no longer afraid of death?', etc... 

I might have misread you, but I thought to share this comment with you. 

Sincerely, 

Magdi

No, Magdi, you didn't misread me. Of course, teaching happens spontaneously all the time. If a dishonest and fake teacher abuses a student financially or sexually, that too teaches her/him a lesson. If someone treats us with decency, love, respect, that too teaches us a lesson. But we are talking about something different here. Someone has asked a question: how do I know I am ready to be a teacher? And I am giving pointers for him to get the answer out of his own honesty. By the by, there is nothing wrong with comparing, measuring and thinking when it originates from love, intelligence and sincerity. The ones who claim that there is something wrong with thinking should put their money where their mouth is and stop thinking and (as a result and most importantly) talking.There is something fishy when one teaches without experiencing that which is the core of the teaching. Who would take tennis lessons from a pro who has learned tennis from books, has never held a racquet in his hand, and doesn't demonstrate his ability to hit the ball inside the court? What can one who is not free from death teach us about freedom? 

Sincerely,

Francis

Francis 

In your response to my comment/question you say: 

"By the by, there is nothing wrong with comparing, measuring and thinking when it originates from love, intelligence and sincerity." 

I have noticed (and that is a comparison/measurement) that, while in the past I used to react to 'upsetting' events with an emotional reaction, I now have noticed that my response is one of unwilled stillness and calm. A response that I would label: 'watching, listening, observing, noticing but being mostly unmoved.' This observation seems to be objective and does not trigger a response such as "Hey, I am enlightened now!". Is this what you mean or are you referring to something else? 

You also say: "The ones who claim that there is something wrong with thinking should put their money where their mouth is and stop thinking and (as a result and most importantly) talking.There is something fishy when one teaches without experiencing that which is the core of the teaching." 

The way I see it, thinking happens. Some of it is very useful/functional. Some of it (out of bad habit and out of ignorance) is aimed at maintaining the 'separate me' feeling good (and sometimes bad) and is illusory (imaginary self). I am talking about the thoughts that (for example) measure 'me vs you' out of ignorance , habit and old unexamined patterns. I see this 'work' as being aware of the 'false' thinking. When I am aware of the 'false' thinking, there is a sincerity that unfolds and the separate 'I' dissolves in this sincerity. 

You also say: " What can one who is not free from death teach us about freedom?" 

Nothing. This freedom from death is an open space that is buzzing with energy. The energy of silence and stillness with no one there.

Dear Magdi,

"By the by, there is nothing wrong with comparing, measuring and thinking when it originates from love, intelligence and sincerity." 

What I am referring to here is any thinking that doesn't arise out of ignorance. It can be practical, celebratory, creative, etc. I agree with you that as long as some thinking or feeling still arises from

ignorance, even after a genuine experience of the Silence, the "work" is not finished, one is not yet established in peace and happiness. There is a distinction to be made between a "liberated one" and a sage. A sage is a "liberated one" who has finished the job and enjoys the fruit of his liberation. Only a sage can guide seekers to wisdom. A prospective teacher should ask himself in his honesty the very simple following questions: Am I established in unshakable peace and happiness? Am I still afraid of death? Has the universe revealed its magical side, fulfilling all my desires? Or am I still having concerns about death, money, relationships, health, etc? 

That's all I was saying. I thought it was pretty simple and straightforward. 

Love, 

Francis

Francis, thanks for your reply. If you don't mind, a few more comments and questions are arising here. 

You say: " There is a distinction to be made between a "liberated one" and a sage. A sage is a "liberated one" who has finished the job and enjoys the fruit of his/her liberation. Only a sage can guide seekers to wisdom". 

I am not familiar with the term "liberated one". Do you mean a person who had a glimpse (or glimpses) of "freedom"?

If so, indeed, a glimpse (or glimpses) might serve as a motivator and a guide for further enquiry, but is not the final attainment. Sometimes (maybe oftentimes) a glimpse can result in what I call "enlightenment ego" which are mages and ideas of a self being enlightened (a contradiction in terms). Is this what you mean when you said a "liberated one"? 

In my working world, sometimes I get concerned about money. But it does not create an internal imbalance. When I do the money math, it helps me make better business decisions. Isn't there a balanced way whereby money, relationships and health are attended to but do not disturb the internal peace? 

It is my experience that once internal peace is attained, then the concerns are no longer concerns. They take their correct place. 

Again, I think I have taken enough of your time, you are working with so many people and have so much to do. I appreciate your previous responses. For me, it is pure energy to be looking at important questions with people who are really serious. Thanks again.

Dear Magdi, 

There are partial glimpses.They prepare the way for enlightenment (nirvikalpa samadhi) which is the revelation of our immortality and eternal splendor. This is liberation from ignorance. However the residues of ignorance, belief systems and feeling patterns based on the belief to be a separate object, remain active in most cases.

Although they have lost their foundation, they deprive for some time the liberated one (the jivan mukta) from the fruit of his liberation: the peace of his true nature and the miraculous enjoyment of our natural state. Some jivan muktas get immediately established in their natural state (sahaja samadhi) at the time of liberation, most of them later on. Some cooperate with the dissolution of these residues (the "work"), usually with the assistance of a guru, others don't, which is usually the case when there is a thick layer of residues (vasanas). One of the most common misconceptions is the belief that the quest ends with the first nirvikalpa samadhi. Of course, an even most common misconception is the confusion between a partial glimpse and nirvikalpa samadhi. One of the early signs of nirvikalpa samadhi is the disappearance of the fear of death. The signs of sahaja samadhi are unbroken peace and happiness and the fulfillment of all desires in a display of divine energies. 

I agree with you, we have milked this (sacred) cow enough for the time being. 

I wish you well. 

Love, 

Francis

