# A few spots available for the summer retreat with Francis Lucille in Temecula, CA.

 **

Summer 2010 Retreat with Francis Lucille in 

Temecula

, California

**

****

&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;

Week #1 - Saturday, August 28 to Saturday, Sept. 4&nbsp;  

Week #2 - Saturday, Sept. 4 to Saturday, Sept. 11&nbsp;  

You are cordially invited to attend this non-residential retreat at the home of Francis &amp; Laura Lucille on a serene hilltop in Temecula, California. Tuition is $420 per week. Please join us for either or both weeks.&nbsp;  

Week #1 begins with dinner at 6:00pm on Saturday, August 28&nbsp;  

Week #2 begins with dinner at 6:00pm on Saturday, Sept. 4&nbsp;  

For those interested, vegetarian lunch and dinner arrangements have been organized separately from the retreat at a cost of $150 per week, cash only. (This includes the cost of retreat food supplies, paper and cleaning supplies, catering, a cleaning service used during and at the end of the retreat, and partially covers scholarships for those performing karma yoga tasks.) A credit of $75 against the food coop fee will be provided for those who wish to cook a dinner meal. The kitchen facilities are available only to those participating in the food coop. There is a $40 per week fee for those not participating in the food coop to help cover the cleaning and maintenance costs of the retreat facility.&nbsp;  

Scholarships are welcome for those with financial hardships only. A scholarship application must be completed and approved prior to August 14th to participate. Please request a scholarship application form from: [bellarotondella@cox.net&nbsp;  

] (http://web.archive.org/web/20100911085052/mailto:bellarotondella@cox.net ?subject=Summer Retreat)  

REGISTRATION: A $100.00 non-refundable deposit is required to guarantee your space at the retreat. Deposits are paid on line by credit card when you RSVP on  

[Meetup](http://web.archive.org/web/20100911085052/http://www.meetup.com/Advaita/calendar/12598398/?from=list&amp;offset=0) [week 1  

Meetup week 2  

] (http://web.archive.org/web/20100911085052/http://www.meetup.com/Advaita/calendar/12598402/?from=list&amp;offset=0)&nbsp;  

The balance is due upon arrival either in cash or by check made out to Francis Lucille on a US bank. Space is limited, RSVPs not guaranteed by a deposit will be removed as the event nears its limit.&nbsp;  

TRANSPORTATION: Temecula is accessible from several airports in the area including San Diego Airport (1 hour), Ontario Airport (1 hour) and Los Angeles Airport (2 hours). Names of friends interested in forming car rental groups to share the cost and facilitate transportation to and from the airport and lodging facilities to Francis' home can be coordinated. Driving instructions to Francis' home are provided below.&nbsp;  

DRIVING INSTRUCTIONS:&nbsp;  

Take Highway 15 to the Rancho California exit, go west on Rancho California (coming from San Diego turn left, coming from LA turn right). Go 2 miles.&nbsp;  

Turn left on Via Santa Rosa (first left after long incline). Go 1 mile.&nbsp;  

Turn right on Via Vaquero. Go one half mile.&nbsp;  

Turn right at driveway marked 49555 (at the bottom of a short hill, directly across from Calle Pinturesca). Francis and Laura's home is the one on the right at the top of the hill, about one half mile.&nbsp;  

CHECK THE INTERNET FOR A COMPLETE LIST OF LOCAL HOTELS &amp; MOTELS,&nbsp;  

A FEW LOCAL ACCOMMODATIONS ARE LISTED BELOW:&nbsp;  

HOTELS (Located approximately 7 minutes from Laura and Francis' home):&nbsp;  

MOTEL 6:&nbsp;  

(951) 676-7199&nbsp;  

41900 Moreno Dr., near corner of Rancho California and Jefferson

HOLIDAY INN EXPRESS: : (extended stay rate 7 days for $84.99 per night, friends of Francis rate&nbsp;  

Jefferson Avenue, Temecula&nbsp;  

951-699-2444&nbsp;  

COMFORT INN:&nbsp;  

(951) 296-3788&nbsp;  

27338 Jefferson Ave, near corner of Winchester and Jefferson

RAMADA INN - Old Town Temecula - Inquire about extended stay rates&nbsp;  

(951) 676-8770&nbsp;  

ALSO: Private rooms available:&nbsp;  

in a peaceful home in Fallbrook De Luz (Located approximately 35 minutes from Laura and Francis' home).&nbsp;  

area for $30 per night.&nbsp;  

Annie and Zia Yazdani&nbsp;  

41850 Via del Gavilan&nbsp;  

Fallbrook, CA 92028&nbsp;  

annie's cell 760 468 4515&nbsp;  

home 760 723 7196 ( but answering machine not&nbsp;  

reliable)&nbsp;  

Private room available:&nbsp;  

in lovely, peaceful Temecula home for $35 per night, contact Tom at:[quantum99@verizon.net](http://web.archive.org/web/20100911085052/mailto: quantum99@verizon.net)

Private rooms available:&nbsp;

in a lovely, peaceful Temecula home, contact Rachel by email at: [canelrachon@hotmail.com](http://web.archive.org/web/20100911085052/mailto:canelrachon@hotmail.com)

