# Francis Answers - 196 - How to practice self-inquiry.

Location: Maryland&nbsp;

  

Question: Hello: I am not sure how to practice Atma Vichara or Self Enquiry. Do I keep asking myself the question &quot;Who Am I&quot; or &quot;What am I&quot; everytime I lose the I-I conciousness?&nbsp;

  

**Do that every time you believe to have strong evidence that you are a limited consciousness, or a body-mind, simply by looking at the evidence you have, be it on the conceptual level or on the feeling level.**

 **** 

Do I practice this technique in meditation in the morning and the evening or do I try to practice all the time?&nbsp;

When I practice a little while, I feel peace, but this only lasts a short time. Do I practice the &quot;What Am I&quot; like a mantra or just when I experience more of body comciousness or Ego conciousness?

  

**Practice only when you feel dissatisfaction, a sense of lack or of misery. If you are at peace, don't try to fix it.**

  

&nbsp;Does this practice help attain extinction of the ego?&nbsp;

  

**Yes. It is the first step. It has to be continued until you truly think and feel that you don't know that consciousness is limited to or by your mind-body.**

  

I am afraid not to practice spiritual discipline because the discipline usually makes me want to experience conciousness at a more intense level. I know Ramakrishna said a devotee\'s desire to experience God or truth should be as intense as a man who has his head held underwater desiring to breathe air. Doesnt the desire to experience truth grow with the practice of spiritual discipline?&nbsp;

  

**Yes, it does, but only in so far as the practice leads to glimpses of our Reality. These glimpses are the real &quot;desire boosters&quot;. Don't think of your inquiry as &nbsp;a practice such as japa, but as an investigation. You don't need to repeat &quot;what am I?&quot;,**

**&quot;what am I?&quot;,**

**&quot;what am I?&quot; like a parrot, but rather to be genuinely interested in finding out your real self, just as a detective is using all means at his disposal to find a criminal, which he does without waisting his time constantly repeating &quot;who did it?&quot;**

.&nbsp;

  

I feel very glad to have found your guidance and like you very much. Walter Newell

  

**Nice. Love,**

**Francis**

