# Francis Answers - 248 - 

  

Name: Bruce&nbsp;  

Location: Michigan, U.S.A.&nbsp;  

Comments: Mr. Lucille, Something has revealed itself as the absolute one to a me it plays as. This is not a product of imagination. It is the very source of all it appears as and the source of the seeing that watches the play. There is nothing that it is not. It has kissed me and now it is everywhere shining as its self. I cannot take my eyes off of it and I am overwhelmed. It can speak as me to all inquiry and there is nothing it does not know as itself. What place do I have as this knowing? I am looking for a mirror. as Bruce

Dear Bruce,

True knowing is its own place. There is no other place. True knowing is the answer, it has no questions.

love,

francis

Dear Mr. Lucille,&nbsp;

Who knows this? Where is this one knowing? How can it be an answer if it was not first a question?

Please, I am sincere... if it is knowing... then it must know what it is as that, yes?&nbsp;

Bruce

Dear Bruce,

You asked the question: &quot;
What place do I have as this knowing?&nbsp;&quot;. &nbsp;I answered: &quot;
True knowing is its own place. There is no other place. True knowing is the answer, it has no questions.&quot;

Now you are asking:

1. &quot;Who knows this?&quot;&nbsp;

The consciousness you truly are, that which in you knows everything you know knows it.

2. &quot;

Where is this one knowing?&quot;

True knowing is its own place. There is no other place.

3. &quot;

How can it be an answer if it was not first a question?&quot;

It is both the question and the answer.

4.&quot;

&nbsp;if it is knowing... then it must know what it is as that, yes?&quot;&nbsp;

Yes, deep inside it knows, but, hypnotized by thoughts and sensible objects, it may have temporarily forgotten his universal nature.

Love,

Francis

